pure-mode (#1)
VincentBailly/rfcs-1: accepted/0034-dependency-strictness.md

# Dependency strictness

## Summary

> This RFC is a proposal to add a new opt-in installation mode called `strict-mode`.

Reviewer: `strict mode` may be a challenging name since it's effectively un-google-able due to JavaScript's [strict mode](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Strict_mode). Are there any potential alternative names that could also work?

Author: Good point, I did not think about this. I don't have another idea right now but I will think about it. Suggestions welcome :)

Random words that may help find a better name: pure / functional / isolated / no-side-effect / reproduceable

Reviewer: One thing to consider here might be what you'd call the "normal" mode, which could help us name this mode. `normal-mode` is probably a safe bet, but it does imply that other modes _aren't_ normal and would be something to avoid.

For this mode, `flat-mode` might be a good one. `symlink-mode`  would be a descriptive one.

Author: fair point, I would call the current default mode "hoisting" but I am wondering if this vocabulary is used in npm the same way it is used in yarn.

Author: I would like the name of the mode to be relating to the purpose (strictness) and not to the implementation details (symlinks).
@darcyclarke @isaacs , what is your take on this?

Author: The latest name is `pure-mode`, any feedback on that?

Strict mode is an essential ingredient to fulfill the assumption that dependency-graph is an accurate description of the relationships between workspaces.

## Motivation

Monorepo-build-tools optimize the dev-workflows by assuming that the dependency graph is an accurate representation of the relationships between workspaces.

This assumption is a good approximation, but it is not always accurate. This inaccuracy can lead to a broken builds or releasing broken code.

> What breaks this assumption is the fact that a dependency of one workspace can affect another workspace even if there is no dependency declared between these two workspaces. This is true because npm de-duplicates dependencies by installing them in the repo's root node_modules folder, making them accessible by every workspace.

Reviewer: I don't entirely see a reason why the proposal couldn't be adapted to also work for "normal" (aka non-workspaces) projects. If that's the case, it would probably be ideal to update these sections to not be workspaces specific.

Author: The motivation is definitely workspace specific as the goal is to isolate workspaces from each-other.
The implementation will mostly not be workspace specific, so it would be easy to apply it to non-workspaces-repo as well. I am unsure whether this RFC should take a stance on the desirability of using this implementation for non-workpaces-repo. I will seek more feedback before making up my mind.

> ## Rational

Reviewer: ```
## Rationale
```

There seems to be a consensus in the community that [import-maps](https://github.com/WICG/import-maps) is key to the future of dependency management. Because this standard is not yet implemented in NodeJS npm cannot use it yet as a strategy to implement strict-mode. Instead, the strategy suggested in this RFC is to implement a solution that works with the current ecosystem by making pieces that can be reused later-on to implement support for import-maps.

The goal is to have isolation between workspaces, so that one workspace's output cannot be impacted by the dependencies of an unrelated workspace. This means that we cannot install a dependency in the root of the repository as it would expose it to all the workspaces.
This means that packages need to be accessed only through the node_modules folder of each workspace. A naive implementation of this would create duplication which would lead to performance and disk usage issues with a cost outweighing the benefit of strictness.

> This RFC suggests to install packages on a flat structure on disk and enable the imports from one to another package by setting up symlinks between them.

Reviewer: does this only work in Workspaces? If so, it's probably worth noting that.

This approach offers these benefits:

- *No package duplication*, a given version of a package is installed only once on disk, no matter how many workspaces depend on it.
- *Strict dependencies*, only the dependencies declared in package.json are installed as symlinks. Phantom dependencies are exposed by failing builds and tests.
- *Work with standard runtimes*, while other alternatives rely on modifying the runtimes (eg. NodeJS), this solution is compatible with the assumptions of most build tools.
- *Battle tested*, this installation strategy has been battle tested by large private repos in Microsoft which have successfully used it through [pnpm](https://pnpm.io/).

## Detailed Explanation

## How does it work?

> This strategy is based on the following characteristic of the [nodejs module resolution algorithm](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#modules_all_together):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This strategy is based on the following characteristic of the [Node.js module resolution algorithm](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#modules_all_together):
```

> When a package is being resolved, the resolution algorithm follows symlinks as if there were real folders. Once a module is resolved, the resolution algorithm calls 'realpath()' on the result. This means that the resolution algorithm always returns a real path. This allows to setup an arbitrary complex dependency graph while making sure nodejs does not create more than one instance of a given module..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a package is being resolved, the resolution algorithm follows symlinks as if there were real folders. Once a module is resolved, the resolution algorithm calls 'realpath()' on the result. This means that the resolution algorithm always returns a real path. This allows to setup an arbitrary complex dependency graph while making sure Node.js does not create more than one instance of a given module.
```

## Implementation

TODO: Describe implementation better.

> - Packages are installed in folder called the store

Reviewer: This is absolutely a bikeshed, but perhaps something like `.cached_modules` or something similar that follows the `*_modules` convention would be ideal so as not to deviate too far off of what the ecosystem has already used for over a decade.

Author: no strong opinion here, but it is worth nothing that this RFC is inspired by nix and pnpm and both call this cache "store". What are the other common folder names in the ecosystem?

Reviewer: >What are the other common folder names in the ecosystem?

I'm not particularly familiar with similar approaches, so can't meaningfully answer this unfortunately 😅

Author: Isaac suggested `node_modules/.npm` I think it was a good suggestion so I updated the RFC with that. How does it sound to you @bnb ?

    - A@1.0.0-21f95f7
      - node_modules
        - B -> ../../B@1.0.0-0d98569
    - B@1.0.0-0d98569
  - node_modules
    - A -> ../.store/a@1.0.0-21f95f7
```

### More complex example: peer dependencies

#### Dependency graph

```
- root
  - A@1.0.0
    - B@1.0.0
    - C@1.0.0
      - B@* (peerDependency)
      - D@1.0.0
	- B@2.0.0
	- C@1.0.0 (circular dependency)
```

#### Installation on disk

```
- root
  - .store
    - A@1.0.0-3511350ab
      - node_modules
        - B -> ../../B@1.0.0-326a99159dc
        - C -> ../../C@1.0.0+B@1.0.0-552c48dcf8b26
    - B@1.0.0-326a99159dc
    - B@2.0.0-e720142097
    - C@1.0.0+B@1.0.0-552c48dcf8b26
      - node_modules
        - B -> ../../B@1.0.0-326a99159dc
        - D => ../../D@1.0.0-1993b2f64e
    - C@1.0.0+B@2.0.0-9a6b39e1d
      - node_modules
        - B -> ../../B@2.0.0-e720142097
        - D => ../../D@1.0.0-1993b2f64e
    - D@1.0.0-1993b2f64e
      - node_modules
        - B -> ../../B@2.0.0-e720142097
        - C -> ../../C@1.0.0+B@2.0.0-9a6b39e1d
  - node_modules
    - A -> ../../.store/A@1.0.0-3511350ab
```

## Nice side effects

TODO: Polish this part.

Implementing strictness this way provide the following advantages:

> - It reduces package duplication compared to the npm default installation mode, making the installation process faster.

Reviewer: Potentially worth linking the pnpm benchmarks here as an example to quantify "faster".

Author: The issue that that "pnpm vs npm vs yarn" does not isolate the perf benefit of symlinking, other optimizations strategies pollute the comparison.

I will think whether we can find/make a fair benchmark.

# Dependency strictness

## Summary

This RFC is a proposal to add a new opt-in installation mode called `strict-mode`.

Strict mode is an essential ingredient to fulfill the assumption that dependency-graph is an accurate description of the relationships between workspaces.

## Motivation

> Monorepo-build-tools optimize the dev-workflows by assuming that the dependency graph is an accurate representation of the relationships between workspaces.

Author: Thanks, I will rephrase

## Rationale

There seems to be a consensus in the community that [import-maps](https://github.com/WICG/import-maps) is key to the future of dependency management. Because this standard is not yet implemented in NodeJS npm cannot use it yet as a strategy to implement strict-mode. Instead, the strategy suggested in this RFC is to implement a solution that works with the current ecosystem by making pieces that can be reused later-on to implement support for import-maps.

The goal is to have isolation between workspaces, so that one workspace's output cannot be impacted by the dependencies of an unrelated workspace. This means that we cannot install a dependency in the root of the repository as it would expose it to all the workspaces.
This means that packages need to be accessed only through the node_modules folder of each workspace. A naive implementation of this would create duplication which would lead to performance and disk usage issues with a cost outweighing the benefit of strictness.

This RFC suggests to install packages on a flat structure on disk and enable the imports from one to another package by setting up symlinks between them.

> This approach offers these benefits:

Author: thanks, done

- *No package duplication*, a given version of a package is installed only once on disk, no matter how many workspaces depend on it.
- *Strict dependencies*, only the dependencies declared in package.json are installed as symlinks. Phantom dependencies are exposed by failing builds and tests.

> - *Work with standard runtimes*, while other alternatives rely on modifying the runtimes (eg. NodeJS), this solution is compatible with the assumptions of most build tools.

Author: runtime, will make it more clear, thanks.

When a module is being resolved, the resolution algorithm follows symlinks as if there were real folders. Once a module is resolved, the resolution algorithm calls 'realpath()' on the result. This means that the resolution algorithm always returns a real path. This allows to setup an arbitrary complex dependency graph while making sure Node.js does not create more than one instance of a given module.

## Implementation

TODO: Describe implementation better.

- Packages are installed in folder called the store
- Each package is installed in a folder name containing a hash of the content of this package (and possibly of its dependencies).
- node_modules folders are created and populated by symlinks to the location of the dependency in the store.
- peer dependencies are resolved based on the parents and treated as normal dependencies. If a conflict occurs and two different parent provide a different version of a peer dependency, this will result in two different store entries for the same package (one for each resolved peer dependency version).

> ### Simple example 

Reviewer 2: Great examples (both the simple and the complex)

Compared to the current npm installation strategy, this proposal reduces package duplication, making the installation process faster. On a prototype, this installation strategy brought down the install time from 5 to 1min on a large monorepo of 500+ workspaces.

The implementation can easily be applied to repos which don't use workspaces to get some perf benefit. Though it is unknown what this perf benefit would be in nono-workspace repo.

## Prior Art and Alternatives

### [pnpm](https://github.com/pnpm/pnpm)

Strict package manager.
This RFC is mostly inspired by pnpm.

### [ied](https://github.com/alexanderGugel/ied)

Strict package manager.
Similar to pnpm but unmaintained.

### [nix](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Nix)

Functional package manager. Can work with npm packages (eg. [node2nix](https://github.com/svanderburg/node2nix) or [nixfromnpm](https://github.com/adnelson/nixfromnpm) )

### [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/)

Strict package manager and project manager.

### [Import maps](https://github.com/WICG/import-maps)

Standard supported by [a few browsers](https://caniuse.com/import-maps) and [deno](https://deno.land/) which makes it possible to implement strictness.

> ## Unresolved Questions and Bikeshedding

Reviewer 2: For many of the questions below, I kept thinking, what does pnpm do? And do they have a rationale for making that  choice?
